+++
title = "The Oblivion Remaster"
date = 2025-04-25
+++

Even I knew that an Oblivion remake was coming out, but I didn't think it would come out at the same time they announced it, wild.

Oblivion and Morrowind hold a very special place in my heart. They were formative games that introduced me to RPGs and are largely responsible for my love of RPGs today. I remember one of my friends in middle school showing me Oblivion when I was over at his house and I was enthralled. You could do **anything** you wanted to, in a video game?

The unfortunate thing was that Oblivion was rated M and my parents were very strict about video game age ratings. I never touched Grand Theft Auto until I was in college, for example. I begged them to let me get Oblivion. This is really embarrassing, but I actually wrote an email to the ESRB asking them if it would be okay if I played Oblivion. I don't know what I thought would happen. I would get to show my parents some proof that they should let me play M rated games? I dunno. Kids.

So I settled for what was available, Morrowind. Imagine "settling" for one of the greatest games of all time. Sitting at a cool T rating and available on my brother's hand-me-down original Xbox, Morrowind was my proper entry into the Elder Scrolls series (I actually had to specifically google "Morrowind ESRB rating" to double check that it was indeed rated T, that is how little I actually think about ESRB ratings now). Morrowind is an interesting game. A lot of the game is esoteric and difficult to use and understand, but I still played the shit out of it. I played it so much my dad was surprised that I was enjoying a "walking and talking game", a term he would use for all RPGs from then on. And there was a lot of walking and a lot of talking. I remember my main annoyance being how long it took to get anywhere. I still have nightmares about how long it took to get from Balmora to the Urshilaku Camp. Playing it as an adult a couple years ago, I realize now how much I actually enjoy those areas of friction and depth. More eloquent people than me have written a lot about Morrowind already so I'll stop here.

I did end up playing Oblivion when I was a little older. I played the shit out of it. I remember getting to 100 hours on a save file, then accidentally deleting it, and having to start a fresh save that I then took to 100 hours. I feel like this happened at least twice. I spent more time in Cyrodiil than I did outside, probably. Again, smarter people than me can tell you the ins and outs of Morrowind and Oblivion and which is "better" but I loved them both. And I liked playing Skyrim too. I haven't put nearly as many hours into Skyrim as I have the other games, but when I do play, I enjoy myself. I understand why they did it, but I wish the series had stuck to its more hardcore RPG mechanics. Maybe after the success of Baldur's Gate 3, the industry will realize people actually like RPG mechanics and more games will have deeper systems.

All this to say, if you had asked me last week what game I would have preferred getting a remake, I would have said Morrowind, but the second I saw screenshots of the Oblivion remaster, all those childhood feelings came rushing back. I saw the map, just the map, in a screenshot and I got hit with a wave of nostalgia so hard I had to sit down. Its truly wild seeing places and people and things I know so intimately, rendered in ridiculous graphics. Watching the opening cutscene made me feel like I was having an out of body experience. It was so familiar, yet so so different.

There are a lot of things I love about this remaster. Oblivion is, more so than Morrowind, difficult to get running well on modern hardware and having the game be so easy (relatively but we'll get to that) to run is nice. I am usually skeptical of remakes but this is one clear advantage. Also, I think they struck a good balance between keeping original mechanics, and modernization. The horrible leveling system is much improved while still keeping the bones of the original. And while I think they went a bit too far on the side of "modern" in the UI design (I like UI that looks like paper a lot) there are quality of life improvements that I appreciate. I like that they kept the original lockpicking minigame, I preferred it to the skyrim/fallout one. I like that they kept a lot of the depth of the mechanics but actually give you more insight into what everything means. For instance, you can actually *see* what racial advantages and disadvantages you get in the character creator. There was obvious a lot of care and love put into this remaster, and they even kept in some of that [iconic Oblivion jank](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R-ES09DJe4w). Great stuff.

I think the biggest issue I have with the game so far, is the graphical performance. Oblivion Remastered is built on Unreal Engine 5 and so it comes with all the baggage and performance issues that entails. The actual textures and models and environments all look great, but they don't look *so* great that they should be causing as many problems as I have. For comparison, I had some initial trouble running Cyberpunk 2077 when it came out. But eventually I bought a much better graphics card when I could get my hands on one, and can now run it at 1400p 60fps no problem. I turn off some of the post-processing effects because they hurt performance and I think they make the game look much worse, but other than that settings are mostly maxed out.

The problem is that Oblivion Remastered doesn't have half the number of settings that some games have. For example, I can't turn off ray tracing. I find no value in ray tracing and turn it off in every game. But I can't do that here. I can only set it to "low". A lot of the post-processing effects don't have individual toggles and are instead behind one main "Postprocessing quality" slider. I would have gladly taken a less graphically impressive game if it ran smoothly at 60fps. As it stands, I had to turn resolution down to 1080p, and install a `engine.ini` file hack and Im still not getting consistent framerate. Messing with graphics settings to try and eke out a 10fps improvement or to get it to at least run consistently well, is probably me least favorite way to spend my time. I really prefer to just throw the setting on high or ultra and stop thinking about it. But that is just my preference and I know super ultra mega good graphics is the way the industry has, and will continue, to go. So I will probably just get over it and suffer. Honestly its probably not as bad as I am making it out to be. I'd just upgrade my GPU, but financially I am probably not going to be able to afford that for a long time, if ever. It would be great if more games were made targeting modest hardware, but I will live.

Overall, I am super happy that the Oblivion Remaster 1) exists and 2) is as good as it is. Its been a joy to play and I am just sad I won't have any time this weekend to sink into it.

---

One post in and I am already breaking my pattern. I wanted this site to be mostly tech focused but honestly I don't think that would keep my attention long term. I have been thinking about the Oblivion Remaster a lot and I really wanted to just talk with someone in depth about it but I don't have anyone to talk to and I'm not on social media so it is going here. Going forward I will probably cover a wide range of topics. I have a couple technical posts I want to write, like about my recent work setting up a web server using Terraform and Ansible, but I also will probably just write whatever. Like I say on my about page, don't expect any consistency from me here. Anyway thanks for reading! 